guides/features: add document for how to gracefully shutdown server (#1388)
grpc/grpc.io: content/en/docs/guides/server-graceful-stop.md

---

> title: Gracefull Shutdown

Reviewer: Graceful

Author: Done

description: >-

>   Explains how to gracefully stop/shutdown a gRPC server.

Reviewer: Why complicate it with "stop/shutdown" here?  I'd recommend keeping one or the other but not both.  And should we say something else besides just repeating the title with "explains how" in front of it?  E.g.

"Explains how to gracefully shut down [or stop, if you prefer] a gRPC server to avoid causing RPC failures for connected clients."

(Note that as a verb, you should use "shut down" with a space.)

Author: Added. Perhaps we should with all guides

---

### Overview

gRPC servers often need to shut down gracefully, ensuring that in-flight RPCs
are completed within a reasonable timeframe and new RPCs are no longer
accepted. The "Graceful shutdown function" facilitates this process, allowing
the server to transition smoothly without abruptly terminating active
connections.

When the "Graceful shutdown function" is called, the server immediately stops

> accepting new RPCs. In-flight RPCs are allowed to continue until they complete

Reviewer: This description isn't really the whole story, and isn't technically true...

The server immediately notifies all clients that they should stop sending new RPCs.  Then after the clients have received that notification, the server will stop accepting new RPCs.

Author: Edited the description

or a specified deadline is reached. Once all active RPCs finish or the deadline
expires, the server shuts down completely.

While a graceful shutdown is optional, it's highly recommended. You can

> shutdown without a graceful shutdown first but that would not be recommended.

Reviewer: "You can shut down without a graceful shutdown" (note verb = space, noun = no space).

Also let's avoid recommended twice in a row here.  Maybe:

```
Because graceful shutdown helps prevent clients from encountering RPC failures, it should be used if
possible.  However, gRPC also provides a forceful shutdown mechanism which will immediately cause the
server to stop serving and close all connections, which results in the failure of any in-flight RPCs.
```

Author: Updated

### How to do Graceful Server Shutdown

The exact implementation of the "Graceful shutdown function" varies depending on
the programming language you are using. However, the general pattern
involves:

> - Initiating the graceful shutdown process by calling "Graceful shutdown

Reviewer: _the_ "Graceful shutdown..." please

Author: Done

  function" on your gRPC server object. This function blocks until all
  currently running RPCs complete. This ensures that in-flight requests are
  allowed to finish processing.
- Specify a timeout period to limit the time allowed for in-progress RPCs to
  finish. It's crucial to separately call the "Forceful shutdown function" on
  the server object using a timer mechanism (depending on your language) to
  trigger a forceful shutdown after a predefined duration. This
  acts as a safety net, ensuring that the server eventually shuts down even if
  some in-flight RPCs don't complete within a reasonable timeframe. This
  prevents indefinite blocking.

The following shows the sequence of events that occur, when a server's graceful

> stop is invoked, in-flight RPCs continue to prorcess, but new RPCs are

Reviewer: *process -- please run a spell check.

Author: Fixed all the spellings

rejected. If some in-flight RPCs are not finished in time, server is forcefully
shutdown.
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
Client->>Server: New RPC Request 1
Client->>Server: New RPC Request 2
Server-->>Server: Graceful Shutdown Invoked
Server->>Client: Continues Processing In-Flight RPCs

> Client->>Client: Detects server shutdown and go find other servers if available 

Reviewer: go find -> finds, or discovers?

Author: Done

alt RPCs complete within timeout
    Server->>Client: Completes RPC 1
    Server->>Client: Completes RPC 2
    Server-->>Server: Graceful Shutdown Complete
else Timeout reached
    Server->>Client: Forceful Shutdown Invoked, terminating pending RPCs
    Server-->>Server: Forceful Shutdown Complete
end
```
The following is a state based view
```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> RUNNING : Server Started
    RUNNING --> GRACEFUL_STOP_INITIATED : Graceful Stop Called (with Timeout)

>     GRACEFUL_STOP_INITIATED --> GRACEFUL_STOPPING : Reject New RPCs

Reviewer: "Reject New RPCs" is really a property of the "GRACEFUL_STOPPING" state, not a new transition, so this seems awkward to me.

Author: Removed the label "Reject New RPCs"

    GRACEFUL_STOPPING --> TERMINATED : Complete In-Flight RPCs (Before Timeout)
    GRACEFUL_STOPPING --> FORCE_STOP : Timeout Reached

>     FORCE_STOP --> TERMINATED : Force Terminate Pending RPCs and Shutdown

Reviewer: FORCE_STOP also isn't a state, but a transition.

Maybe something like
```
GRACEFUL_STOPPING --> TIMER _EXPIRED : Timeout Reached
TIMER_EXPIRED --> TERMINATED : Force Stop Called
```
?

Author: Done

```

### Language Support

| Language | Example           |
|----------|-------------------|
| Java     | [Java example]    |
| Go       | [Go example]      |

> | Python   |                   |

Reviewer: Why is there an empty placeholder for Python?  Should we delete it?  Or should we add another empty placeholder for C++?

Author: Added C++

---
title: Gracefully stopping a server
description: >-
  Explains how to gracefully stop/shutdown a gRPC server.
---

### Overview

gRPC servers often need to shut down gracefully, ensuring that in-flight RPCs
are completed within a reasonable timeframe and new RPCs are no longer
accepted. "Graceful shutdown function" facilitates this process, allowing the server to
transition smoothly without abruptly terminating active connections.

When "Graceful shutdown function" is called, the server immediately stops accepting new
RPCs. In-flight RPCs are allowed to continue until they complete or a specified
deadline is reached. Once all active RPCs finish or the deadline expires, the
server shuts down completely.

> ### How to use Wait-for-Ready

Reviewer 2: Need to replace "Wait-for-Ready"

Author: Fixed

The exact implementation of "Graceful shutdown function" varies depending on the
programming language you are using. However, the general pattern
involves:

- Initiating the graceful shutdown process by calling "Graceful shutdown
  Function" on your gRPC server object. This function blocks until all

>   currently running RPCs completed. This ensures that in-flight requests are

Reviewer 2: s/completed/complete/

Author: Done

  allowed to finish processing.
- Specify a timeout period to limit the time allowed for in-progress RPCs to
  finish. It's crucial to call "Forceful Shutdown Function" on server object

>   with a timeout before calling "Graceful shutdown function". This acts as a

Reviewer 2: These need to be reversed, first graceful, then forceful.

Author: Oh this is intentional. So, forceful shutdown functions needs to be scheduled to execute in a separate thread after some time because graceful shutdown is a blocking call. In go we use a timeAfter function which executes the forceful shutdown in a new goroutine after the specified time passes

Reviewer 2: This is very golang specific.  Other languages would initiate a graceful shutdown with a timeout and then if that indicated that it timed out would call a forceful shutdown.  For example, in Java it looks like:
```Java
        server.shutdown();
        try {
          // Wait for RPCs to complete processing
          if (!server.awaitTermination(30, TimeUnit.SECONDS)) {
            // That was plenty of time. Let's cancel the remaining RPCs
            server.shutdownNow();
            // shutdownNow isn't instantaneous, so give a bit of time to clean resources up
            // gracefully. Normally this will be well under a second.
            server.awaitTermination(5, TimeUnit.SECONDS);
          }
        } catch (InterruptedException ex) {
          server.shutdownNow();
        }
```

I'm not sure of the best approach, because for Go it is very important to setup a timer to run the forceful stop on another thread, while for Java the stop and wait are separate commands so can be done in the same thread.

Author: I made it more generic. Let me know if this looks good to you.

  safety net, ensuring that the server eventually shuts down even if some
  in-flight RPCs don't complete within a reasonable timeframe. This prevents
  indefinite blocking.

> The following shows the sequence of events that occur, when a server graceful

Reviewer 2: s/server/server's/

Author: Done

> stop is invoked, in-flight RPCs continue to prorcess but new RPCs are rejected.

Reviewer 2: Replace comma with a period. 
s/prorcess but/process, but/

Author: Done

> If all in-flight RPCs are not finished in time, server is forcefully shutdown.

Reviewer 2: s/If all in-flight RPCs are not finished/If some in-flight RPCS do not finish/
s/, server/, the server/

Author: Done

Client->>Server: New RPC Request 2
Server->>Client: Processing RPC 1
Server->>Client: Processing RPC 2
Server-->>Server: Graceful Stop Invoked
Server->>Client: Continues Processing In-Flight RPCs
Client->>Server: New RPC Request 3 (Rejected)
alt RPCs complete within timeout
    Server->>Client: Completes RPC 1
    Server->>Client: Completes RPC 2
    Server-->>Server: Shutdown Complete
    Client->>Server: New RPC Request 4 (Rejected)
else Timeout reached
    Server->>Client: RPC 2 and other pending RPCs forcefully terminated
    Server-->>Server: Shutdown Complete
    Client->>Server: New RPC Request 4 (Rejected)
end
```
The following is a state based view
```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> RUNNING : Server Started
    RUNNING --> GRACEFUL_STOP_INITIATED : GracefulStop() Called (with Timeout)
    GRACEFUL_STOP_INITIATED --> GRACEFUL_STOPPING : Reject New RPCs
    GRACEFUL_STOPPING --> TERMINATED : Complete In-Flight RPCs (Before Timeout)
    GRACEFUL_STOPPING --> FORCE_STOP : Timeout Reached
    FORCE_STOP --> TERMINATED : Force Terminate Pending RPCs and Shutdown
```

### Alternatives

- Forceful Shutdown: Immediately terminates the server using "Forceful Shutdown

>   Function" on server object, potentially interrupting active RPCs and leading

Reviewer 2: s/"Forceful Shutdown Function" on server/the "Forceful Shutdown Function" on the server/
s/potentially interrupting active RPCs and leading to/any active RPCs are interrupted, which will send/

Author: Done everywhere including graceful shutdown function

---

> title: GracefulStop

Reviewer 3: We would want the title to be "Graceful Stop".

Reviewer 2: I would suggest "Gracefully stopping a server"

Author: Change to "Gracefully stopping a server"

Reviewer: `Graceful Shutdown`?

If you look at the website preview, this becomes the second guide that word wraps.  I'd rather avoid that if at all possible.

Author: Changed to Graceful Shutdown

description: >-
  Explains how to gracefully shut down a gRPC server.
---

### Overview

gRPC servers often need to shut down gracefully, ensuring that in-flight RPCs
are completed within a reasonable timeframe and new RPCs are no longer

> accepted. `GracefulStop()` facilitates this process, allowing the server to

Reviewer 3: I know you are using "GracefulStop()" here as a placeholder for the language specific functions, but I still think it might still lead readers to look for a function with this exact name. How about just referring it to as the "graceful stop function"? It's more wordy but can avoid a potential confusion.

Author: Changed to "Graceful Shutdown Function"

the server to transition smoothly without abruptly terminating active
connections.

When the "Graceful shutdown function" is called, the server immediately stops
accepting new RPCs. In-flight RPCs are allowed to continue until they complete
or a specified deadline is reached. Once all active RPCs finish or the deadline
expires, the server shuts down completely.

### How to do Graceful Server Shutdown

The exact implementation of the "Graceful shutdown function" varies depending on
the programming language you are using. However, the general pattern
involves:

- Initiating the graceful shutdown process by calling "Graceful shutdown
  Function" on your gRPC server object. This function blocks until all
  currently running RPCs complete. This ensures that in-flight requests are
  allowed to finish processing.
- Specify a timeout period to limit the time allowed for in-progress RPCs to

>   finish. It's crucial to call the "Forceful shutdown function" on the server

Reviewer 2: How about "It's crucial in Go to call", since this is really go specific?

  finish. It's crucial to call `Stop()` on server object with a timeout before
  calling `GracefulStop()`. This acts as a safety net, ensuring that the server
  eventually shuts down even if some in-flight RPCs don't complete within a
  reasonable timeframe.  This prevents indefinite blocking.

The following shows the sequence of events that occur, when a server graceful
shutdown is invoked while active RPCs are being process and client is sending

> new RPCs.

Reviewer 3: Can you also mention here the two alternative scenarios the diagram covers?

Author: Added

alt RPCs complete within timeout
    Server->>Client: Completes RPC 1
    Server->>Client: Completes RPC 2
    Server-->>Server: Shutdown Complete
    Client->>Server: New RPC Request 4 (Rejected)
else Timeout reached
    Server->>Client: RPC 2 and other pending RPCs forcefully terminated
    Server-->>Server: Shutdown Complete
    Client->>Server: New RPC Request 4 (Rejected)
end
```
The following is a state based view
```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> RUNNING : Server Started
    RUNNING --> GRACEFUL_STOP_INITIATED : GracefulStop() Called (with Timeout)
    GRACEFUL_STOP_INITIATED --> GRACEFUL_STOPPING : Reject New RPCs
    GRACEFUL_STOPPING --> TERMINATED : Complete In-Flight RPCs (Before Timeout)
    GRACEFUL_STOPPING --> FORCE_STOP : Timeout Reached
    FORCE_STOP --> TERMINATED : Force Terminate Pending RPCs and Shutdown
```

### Alternatives

- Forceful Shutdown: Immediately terminates the server using "Forceful Shutdown
  Function" on server object, potentially interrupting active RPCs and leading
  to errors on the client-side. Use only as a last resort.

### Language Support

| Language | Example           |
|----------|-------------------|

> | Java     |                   |

Author: Added

| Python   |                   |

[Go example]: https://github.com/grpc/grpc-go/tree/master/examples/features/gracefulstop

> [grpc doc]: https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/master/doc/server-graceful-stop.md

Reviewer 3: This link takes me to a 404.

Author: i think the link will work only after merge. That's what i see in other guides.

Reviewer: FWIW, you can use the "deploy preview" at the bottom to view the page as it would appear on grpc.io

Author: I have removed the self link

### How to do Graceful Server Shutdown

The exact implementation of the "Graceful shutdown function" varies depending on
the programming language you are using. However, the general pattern
involves:

- Initiating the graceful shutdown process by calling the "Graceful shutdown
  function" on your gRPC server object. This function blocks until all
  currently running RPCs complete. This ensures that in-flight requests are
  allowed to finish processing.
- Specify a timeout period to limit the time allowed for in-progress RPCs to
  finish. It's crucial to separately call the "Forceful shutdown function" on
  the server object using a timer mechanism (depending on your language) to
  trigger a forceful shutdown after a predefined duration. This
  acts as a safety net, ensuring that the server eventually shuts down even if
  some in-flight RPCs don't complete within a reasonable time frame. This
  prevents indefinite blocking.

The following shows the sequence of events that occur during the graceful
shutdown process. When a server's graceful shutdown is invoked, in-flight RPCs
continue to process, but new RPCs are rejected. If some in-flight RPCs are not

> finished in time, server is forcefully shut down.

Reviewer: "_the_ server", please

---
title: Graceful Shutdown
description: >-

>   Explains how to gracefully shut down [or stop, if you prefer] a gRPC server

Reviewer: The brackets were there for you to read and choose either "stop" or "shut down", not to copy verbatim.  :)

Author: Ah yeah. Forgot to remove. Removed now.

  to avoid causing RPC failures for connected clients.
---

### Overview

gRPC servers often need to shut down gracefully, ensuring that in-flight RPCs
are completed within a reasonable time frame and new RPCs are no longer
accepted. The "Graceful shutdown function" facilitates this process, allowing
the server to transition smoothly without abruptly terminating active
connections.

When the "Graceful shutdown function" is called, the server immediately

> notifies all clients that they should stop sending new RPCs. Then after the

Reviewer: Nit: "that they should" -> "to"

Author: Done

expires, the server shuts down completely.

### How to do Graceful Server Shutdown

The exact implementation of the "Graceful shutdown function" varies depending on
the programming language you are using. However, the general pattern
involves:

- Initiating the graceful shutdown process by calling "Graceful shutdown

>   Function" on your gRPC server object. This function blocks until all

Reviewer: Let's be consistent with our capitalization please.  Either "Function" _everywhere_ when used in quotes like this, or "function" instead.

Author: Fixed everywhere

  currently running RPCs complete. This ensures that in-flight requests are
  allowed to finish processing.
- Specify a timeout period to limit the time allowed for in-progress RPCs to
  finish. It's crucial to separately call the "Forceful shutdown function" on
  the server object using a timer mechanism (depending on your language) to
  trigger a forceful shutdown after a predefined duration. This
  acts as a safety net, ensuring that the server eventually shuts down even if
  some in-flight RPCs don't complete within a reasonable timeframe. This
  prevents indefinite blocking.

The following shows the sequence of events that occur, when a server's graceful
stop is invoked, in-flight RPCs continue to prorcess, but new RPCs are
rejected. If some in-flight RPCs are not finished in time, server is forcefully
shutdown.
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
Client->>Server: New RPC Request 1
Client->>Server: New RPC Request 2
Server->>Client: Processing RPC 1

> Server->>Client: Processing RPC 2

Reviewer: I found these lines to be confusing when initially reading.  I thought they indicated the RPCs had completed.  Can the same meaning be conveyed if these lines are just deleted?

Author: yeah i removed. The fact that New RPC Request 1 and New RPC Request 2 is Client->Server, it means request is received by server for processing.

> rejected. If some in-flight RPCs are not finished in time, server is forcefully

Reviewer: This is a run-on sentence, and has an unnecessary comma.  Also stop->shutdown for consistency.

The following shows the sequence of events that occur during the graceful shutdown process.
When a server's graceful shutdown is invoked, in-flight RPCs continue to process, but new RPCs are
rejected. If some.......

Author: Updated

Server->>Client: Continues Processing In-Flight RPCs
Client->>Server: New RPC Request 3 (Rejected)
alt RPCs complete within timeout
    Server->>Client: Completes RPC 1
    Server->>Client: Completes RPC 2
    Server-->>Server: Shutdown Complete

>     Client->>Server: New RPC Request 4 (Rejected)

Reviewer: Once a connection has been closed, RPCs aren't technically "rejected" anymore.  They literally can't even be attempted.

Also should we discuss that the client will detect the server shutting down and go find other servers to send its traffic to, if at all possible?

Author: Removed the rejected part and added the client will find another server if applicable

> shutdown.

Reviewer: Verb form, so should be "shut down"

Author: Updated

else Timeout reached

>     Server->>Client: RPC 2 and other pending RPCs forcefully terminated

Reviewer: This should clearly show the forceful shutdown function being called by the application.

Author: Updated

> Client->>Client: Detects server shutdown and go finds other servers if available

Reviewer: Remove "go" here please.

Author: Done

    Server-->>Server: Shutdown Complete
    Client->>Server: New RPC Request 4 (Rejected)
end
```
The following is a state based view
```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> RUNNING : Server Started
    RUNNING --> GRACEFUL_STOP_INITIATED : GracefulStop() Called (with Timeout)
    GRACEFUL_STOP_INITIATED --> GRACEFUL_STOPPING : Reject New RPCs
    GRACEFUL_STOPPING --> TERMINATED : Complete In-Flight RPCs (Before Timeout)
    GRACEFUL_STOPPING --> FORCE_STOP : Timeout Reached
    FORCE_STOP --> TERMINATED : Force Terminate Pending RPCs and Shutdown
```

### Alternatives

> - Forceful Shutdown: Immediately terminates the server using "Forceful Shutdown

Reviewer: And here "Shutdown" is capitalized.

Author: Fixrf

  Function" on server object, potentially interrupting active RPCs and leading

>   to errors on the client-side. Use only as a last resort.

Reviewer: This "alternative" section is awkward.  And this "last resort" comment as well.  Maybe the overview can just mention at the end that gracefully shutting down is not mandatory -- you can forcefully shut down without a graceful shutdown first, but that would not be recommended as it would result in waste.  Or don't even mention it since it's not recommended?

Author: Removed alternative section and added a sentence in Overview

>     [*] --> RUNNING : Server Started
>     RUNNING --> GRACEFUL_STOP_INITIATED : Graceful Stop Called (with Timeout)
>     GRACEFUL_STOP_INITIATED --> GRACEFUL_STOPPING
>     GRACEFUL_STOPPING --> TERMINATED : In-Flight RPCs Completed (Before Timeout)
>     GRACEFUL_STOPPING --> TIMER_EXPIRED : Timeout Reached
>     TIMER_EXPIRED --> TERMINATED : Force Stop Called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [*] --> SERVING : Server Started
    SERVING --> GRACEFUL_SHUTDOWN : Graceful Shutdown Called (with Timeout)
    GRACEFUL_SHUTDOWN --> TERMINATED : In-Flight RPCs Completed (Before Timeout)
    GRACEFUL_SHUTDOWN --> TIMER_EXPIRED : Timeout Reached
    TIMER_EXPIRED --> TERMINATED : Forceful Shutdown Called
```

Author: Changed
